---
layout: ../../layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro
title: 'Test'
pubDate: 2022-10-04
description: 'Notes on book'
author: 'Anon'
image:
    url:
    alt:
tags: []
---

RK

## Chapter 1
* p. 18 'Socially, Palestine was still heavily rural with a predominantly patriarchal, hierarchical nature, as it largely remained until 1948. It was dominated by narrow urban elites drawn from a few families like my own, who clung to their positions and privileges even as they adapted to new conditions, with younger family members acquiring modern educations and learning foreign languages to maintain their standing and their advantages. 
* 'These elites controlled the politics of Palestine, although the growth of new professions, trades, and classes meant that in the 1900s there were more avenues of advancement and upward mobility. In the rapidly growing coastal cities of Jaffa and Haifa in particular, change was more visible than in the more conservative inland towns such as Jerusalem, Nablus, and Hebron, as the former witnessed the appearance of a nascent commercial bourgeoisie and an embryonic urban working class.
* 'At the same time, the sense of identity of large parts of the population was also evolving and shifting.
* 'My grandfather's generation would have identified–and would have been identified–in terms of family, religious affiliation, and city or village of origin. They would have cherished their descent from revered ancestors; they would have been proud speakers of Arabic, the language of the Qur'an, and heirs to Arab culture. 
* 'They might have felt loyalty to the Ottoman dynasty and state, an allegiance rooted in custom as well as a sense of the Ottoman state as a bulwark defending the lands of the earliest and greatest Muslim empires, lands coveted by Christendom since the Crusades, lands in which the holy cities of Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem were located. That loyalty had begun to weaken in the nineteenth century, however, as the religious foundation of the state was diminished, as Ottoman military defeats and territorial losses mounted, and as the ideas of nationalism evolved and spread.
* 'Greater mobility and access to education accelerated these shifts, and the burgeoning press and availability of printed books also played an important role: thirty-two new newspapers and periodicals were established in Palestine between 1908 and 1914, with even more in the 1920s and 1930s." 
* 'Different forms of identification, such as nationhood, and novel ideas about social organization, including working-class solidarity and the role of women in society, were emerging to challenge previously fixed affiliations. These modes of belonging, whether to a national or class or professional group, were still in formation and involved overlapping ties of loyalty. Yusuf Diya's 1899 letter to Herzl, for example, evokes religious affiliation, Ottoman loyalty, local pride in Jerusalem, and a clear sense of identification with Palestine.
* 'In this first decade of the twentieth century, a large proportion of the Jews living in Palestine were still culturally quite similar to and lived reasonably comfortably alongside city-dwelling Muslims and Christians. They were mostly ultra-Orthodox and non-Zionist, mizrahi (eastern) or Sephardic (descendants of Jews expelled from Spain), urbanites of Middle Eastern or Mediterranean origin who often spoke Arabic or Turkish, even if only as a second or third language. In spite of marked religious distinctions between them and their neighbors, they were not foreigners, nor were they Europeans or settlers: they were, saw themselves, and were seen as Jews who were part of the indigenous Muslim-majority society.'
* p.19 'Moreover, some European Ashkenazi Jews who settled in Palestine at this time, including such ardent Zionists as David Ben-Gurion and Yitzhak Ben-Zvi (one became prime minister and the other president), initially sought a measure of integration into the local society. Ben-Gurion and Ben-Zvi even took Ottoman nationality, studied in Istanbul, and learned Arabic and Turkish.
* 'The much more rapid pace of transformation in the advanced countries of Western Europe and North America compared to the rest of the world during the modern industrial era led many outside observers, including some eminent scholars, to mistakenly claim that Middle Eastern societies, including Palestine, were stagnant and unchanging, or even "in decline." 
* 'We now know from many indices that this was by no means the case: a growing body of solidly grounded historical work based on Ottoman, Palestinian, Israeli, and Western sources completely refutes these false notions. However, recent scholarship on Palestine in the years before 1948 goes much further than just dealing with the misconceptions and distortions at the heart of such thinking. 
* 'Whatever it may have looked like to uninformed outsiders, it is clear that by the first part of the twentieth century there existed in Palestine under Ottoman rule a vibrant Arab society undergoing a series of rapid and accelerating transitions, much like several other Middle Eastern societies around it.'

***

* p. 19 'Major external shocks have powerful effects...esp. on their sense of self. The...Empire grew increasingly fragile in the early part of the century, with major territorial losses in the Balkans, Libya, and elsewhere.'
* p. 19 Libyan War in 1911-12
* p. 19 Balkan War in 1912-13
* p. 19 Empire had disappeared by 1918
* p. 19 Greater Syria, which included present-day Jordan, Syria, Palestine, and Lebanon, is estimated to have suffered half a million deaths between 1915 and 1918 due to famine alone.
* Hunger and general hardship were only one cause o the dire state of the population. Focused as most observers were on the appalling casualties on the Western Front, few realized tha the Ottoman Empire overall was dealt the heaviste wartime losses of any major power.
	* Over 3m dead, 15% of the total population.
	* Most of these casualties were civilians–the largest single group being the victims of massacres at the behest of the Ottoman authorities in 1915 and 1916–Armenians, Assyrians, and other Christians.
* 'Additionally, of the 2.8m Ottoman soldiers originally mobilized, as many as 750k may have died during the war. Arab casualties were correspondingly high, since the army units recruited in Iraq and Greater Syria were heavily represented on bloody battlegrounds such as the Ottoman eastern front against Russia, as well as in Gallipoli, Sinai, Palestine, and Iraq.'
* p.20 Justin McCarthy estimated that the population of Palestine was growing about 1% annually until 1914. Druring the war, the population declined by about 6%. 
* Many young men were killed or wounded in the war. 'The wartime exactions of the Ottoman authorities included the hanging, on charges of treason, of my aunt's fiancé, 'Abd al-Ghani al-'Uraysi, alongside many other Arab nationalist patriots.'
* 'In 1917, my grandfather Hajj Raghib al-Khalidi, my grandmother Amira, along with other residents of the Jaffa area, received an evacuation order from the Ottoman authorities. To escape the encroaching danger of war, they took their four young children (including my father) from Tal al-Rish–a town near Jaffa.'
* p.22 'For several months, my family sought refuge in the hill village of Dayr Ghassaneh, east of Jaffa with members of the Barghouti clan with whom they had long-standing connections.


* 'The village was far enough from the sea to be out of the range of Allied naval guns, and away from the heavy fighting along the coast as the British armies under General Sir Edmund Allenby advanced northward.
* 'From the spring of 1917 through the late fall, the southern parts of the country were the scene of a grinding series of battles between British and Ottoman forces, the latter backed by German and Austrian troops. The fighting involved trench warfare, air raids, and intensive land and naval artillery bombardments. British and imperial units launched a number of major offensives, which slowly pushed back the Ottoman defenders. The fighting spread to the north of Palestine in the winter (Jerusalem, in the center, was captured by the British in December 1917), and continued into early 1918. In many regions, the direct impact of the war caused intense suffering. One of the worst-hit districts comprised Gaza City and the nearby towns and villages, where large areas were pulverized by heavy British shelling during prolonged trench warfare and then the slow Allied advance up the Mediterranean coastline.
* 'Soon after Jaffa fell to the British in November 1917, my grandfather's family returned to their Tal al-Rish home. Another aunt, Fatima al-Khalidi Salam, then an eight-year-old, recalled her father addressing the British troops. "Welcome, welcome," he said in his undoubtedly imperfect English. Um Hasan, who heard this as "Ya waylkum" (*Woe to you!* in Arabic) feared that he had endangered the family by taunting the alien soldiers. Whether Hajj Raghib al-Khalidi welcomed or lamented the arrival of the British, two of his sons were still fighting on the other side, and two were being held as POWs, which placed the family in a perilous position. Two uncles remained with the Ottoman army, which resisted the British in northern Palestine and Syria, until late 1918.
* 'They were among the thousands of men still absent from their homes at war's end. Some had emigrated to the Americas to escape conscription while many, the writer Aref Shehadeh among them, were being held in Allied prisoner of war camps.
* 'Others were in the hills, dodging the draft, like Najib Nassar, editor of the outspokenly anti-Zionist Haifa newspaper *al-Karmil*.
* 'Meanwhile, there were Arab soldiers who had deserted the Ottoman army and crossed the lines, or who were serving in the forces of the Arab Revolt led by Sharif Husayn and allied with Britain. Still others-such as Isa al-Isa, the editor of *Filastin*–who had been exiled by the Ottoman authorities for his fierce independence with its strong echoes of Arab nationalism–were forced from the relatively cosmopolitan confines of Jaffa to various small towns in the heart of rural Anatolia.
* 'All of these profound material shocks heightened the impact of the wrenching postwar political changes, which obliged people to rethink long-standing senses of identity. By the end of the fighting, people in Palestine and in much of the Arab world found themselves under occupation by European armies. 
* 'After 400 years, they were confronted by the disconcerting prospect of alien rule and the swift disappearance of Ottoman control, which had been the only system of government known for over 20 generations.
* 'It was in the midst of this great trauma–against a grim background of suffering, loss, and deprivation–that Palestinians learned of the Balfour Declaration

***

* p. 23 '
